Update Get Started tutorial part 2 with a Space example (#3474)
astronomer/docs: learn/get-started-with-airflow-part-2.md

## Prerequisites

> - The [Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/install-cli).

Reviewer: Wouldn't mind being redundant with the prerequisites. I'd like someone to be able to complete this tutorial independently of content in Part 1, since they might see the topics in the title and jump right in to learn about connections, etc

Author: Yeah, I think it makes sense to mention the Astro CLI again as a prerequisite. Would you also re-mention the IDE and Python? I lean towards no, because if someone is learning about connections they very likely have written Python code before.

## Prerequisites

- The [Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/get-started-cli) version 1.25.0 or later.

> - The completed project from [Part 1: Write your first DAG](get-started-with-airflow.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The completed project from [Part 1: Write your first DAG](get-started-with-airflow.md). To jump directly into this tutorial, create a new Astro project and copy the code at the end of [Step 6](get-started-with-airflow.md#step-6-write-a-new-dag) into your project as a new DAG.
```

:::

## Step 1: Create your DAG

> In this second part of the Get Started with Airflow tutorial, you will add a third DAG to your Astro project that interacts with GitHub and two external APIs to print the location of the International Space Station (ISS) to your task logs after a specific commit message is pushed to your GitHub repository.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this second part of the Get Started with Airflow tutorial, you will add a third DAG to your Astro project. The new DAG interacts with GitHub and two external APIs to print the location of the International Space Station (ISS) to your task logs after a specific commit message is pushed to your GitHub repository.
```

Reviewer 2: I think we need a comment here that they will add the DAG from the Astronomer Registry, and a brief sentence about what the registry is, since we don't cover it in Part 1 anymore.

1. Create a new Python file in the `dags` directory of your Astro project called `find_the_iss.py`.
2. Open the Astronomer Registry page for the [`find_the_iss`](https://registry.astronomer.io/dags/object_storage_use_case/versions/latest) example DAG. Click `</>` and copy the DAG code that appears.

    ![Screenshot of the Astronomer Registry showing the DAG code](/img/tutorials/get-started-with-airflow-part-2_registry_code_copy.png)

3. Paste the code into `find_the_iss.py`.

## Step 2: Add a provider package

1. Open the Airflow UI to confirm that your DAG was pushed to your environment. On the **DAGs** page, you should see a "DAG Import Error" like the one shown here:

    ![Screenshot of the Airflow UI Showing an Import Error saying: ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'airflow.providers.github'](/img/tutorials/get-started-with-airflow-part-2_ImportError.png)

> This error is due to a missing provider package. Provider packages are Python packages maintained separately from core Airflow that contain hooks and operators for interacting with external services. You can browse all available providers in the [Astronomer Registry](https://registry.astronomer.io/).

Reviewer 2: Should this block be indented under step 1?

:::

## Step 1: Create your DAG

In this second part of the Get Started with Airflow tutorial, you add a third DAG to your Astro project. This time you copy the DAG code from the [Astronomer Registry](https://registry.astronomer.io/), which is a resource containing both, information about Airflow providers and modules, as well as many example DAGs.

The new DAG interacts with GitHub and two external APIs to print the location of the International Space Station (ISS) to your task logs after a specific commit message is pushed to your GitHub repository.

1. Create a new Python file in the `dags` directory of your Astro project called `find_the_iss.py`.
2. Open the Astronomer Registry page for the [`find_the_iss`](https://registry.astronomer.io/dags/object_storage_use_case/versions/latest) example DAG. Click `</>` and copy the DAG code that appears.

    ![Screenshot of the Astronomer Registry showing the DAG code](/img/tutorials/get-started-with-airflow-part-2_registry_code_copy.png)

3. Paste the code into `find_the_iss.py`.

## Step 2: Add a provider package

> 1. Open the Airflow UI to confirm that your DAG was pushed to your environment. On the **DAGs** page, you should see a "DAG Import Error" like the one shown here:

Reviewer: We need a step here that says something like "If you aren't already running Airflow locally, run `astro dev start` to start your project."

    ![Screenshot of the Airflow UI Showing an Import Error saying: ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'airflow.providers.github'](/img/tutorials/get-started-with-airflow-part-2_ImportError.png)

>     This error is due to a missing provider package. Provider packages are Python packages maintained separately from core Airflow that contain hooks and operators for interacting with external services. You can browse all available providers in the [Astronomer Registry](https://registry.astronomer.io/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This error is due to a missing provider package. **_Provider packages_** are Python packages maintained separately from core Airflow that contain hooks and operators for interacting with external services. You can browse all available providers in the [Astronomer Registry](https://registry.astronomer.io/).
```

    Your DAG uses operators from two Airflow provider packages: the [HTTP provider](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/http/versions/latest) and the [GitHub provider](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/github/versions/latest). While the HTTP provider is pre-installed in the Astro Runtime image, the GitHub provider is not, which causes the DAG import error.

> 2. Open the [GitHub provider page](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow-providers-github/versions/latest) in the Astronomer Registry.

Reviewer: The screenshot for this should appear after Step 3. Also we might want to reduce the screenshot size or specifically draw attention to the **Use provider** button, as it's currently hard to see where the button is in the screenshot

:::

## Step 1: Create your DAG

In this second part of Astronomer's introduction to Airflow, you'll add a third DAG to your Astro project. Instead of writing the DAG yourself, you'll copy the DAG code from the [Astronomer Registry](https://registry.astronomer.io/), which contains documentation for Airflow providers and modules as well as many example DAGs.

The new DAG interacts with GitHub and two external APIs to print the location of the International Space Station (ISS) to your task logs after a specific commit message is pushed to your GitHub repository.

1. Create a new Python file in the `dags` directory of your Astro project called `find_the_iss.py`.
2. Open the Astronomer Registry page for the [`find_the_iss`](https://registry.astronomer.io/dags/object_storage_use_case/versions/latest) example DAG. Click `</>` and copy the DAG code that appears.

    ![Screenshot of the Astronomer Registry showing the DAG code](/img/tutorials/get-started-with-airflow-part-2_registry_code_copy.png)

3. Paste the code into `find_the_iss.py`. Your code should look like this:

<details>

> <summary>Click to view the full DAG code</summary>

Reviewer: Should we avoid having the code here since we want to encourage them to copy it from the Registry? I think the details usage makes sense in part 1 because we guide them through several steps of writing, but I worry the code here serves as a shortcut that we might not want users to take.

- `start_date` is set to January 1st, 2024, which means the DAG starts to be scheduled after this date.
- `schedule` is set to `@daily`, which means the DAG runs every day at 0:00 UTC. You can use any [CRON](https://crontab.guru/) string or shorthand for time-based schedules. 
- `catchup` is set to `False` to prevent DAG runs from between the `start_date` and today from being backfilled automatically.
- `doc_md` is set to the docstring of the DAG file to create [DAG Docs](custom-airflow-ui-docs-tutorial.md) you can view in the Airflow UI.
- `default_args` is set to a dictionary with the key `owner` set to `airflow` and the key `retries` set to `3`. The latter setting gives each task in this DAG 3 retries before failing, which is a common best practice to protect against transient failures.
- `tags` adds the `Connections` tag to the DAG in the Airflow UI.

```python
@dag(
    start_date=datetime(2024, 6, 1),
    schedule="@daily",
    catchup=False,
    doc_md=__doc__,
    default_args={"owner": "airflow", "retries": 3},
    tags=["Connections"],
)
def find_the_iss():
```

The DAG itself has three tasks. 

> The first task uses the [GithubSensor](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow-providers-github/versions/latest/modules/GithubSensor) to check whether the commit message `Where is the ISS right now?` has been added to your GitHub repository with the help of the `commit_message_checker` function described previously. 

Reviewer 2: I would bullet the three tasks to make this easier to read.

> This task utilizes both, the Airflow variable (`my_github_repo`) and the Airflow connection (`my_github_connection`) to access the correct repository with the appropriate credentials. The [sensor](what-is-a-sensor.md) checks for the tag every 5 seconds (`poke_interval`) and will time out after one hour (`timeout`). It is best practice to always set a `timeout` because the default value is quite long at 7 days, which can impact performance if left unchanged in DAGs that run on a higher frequency.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This task utilizes the Airflow variable (`my_github_repo`) and the Airflow connection (`my_github_connection`) to access the correct repository with the appropriate credentials. The [sensor](what-is-a-sensor.md) checks for the tag every 5 seconds (`poke_interval`) and will time out after one hour (`timeout`). It is best practice to always set a `timeout` because the default value is 7 days, which can impact performance if left unchanged in DAGs that run on a higher frequency.
```

4. Paste the provider name and version into the `requirements.txt` file of your Astro project. Make sure to only add `apache-airflow-providers-github=<version>` without `pip install`.
5. Restart your Airflow environment by running `astro dev restart`. Unlike DAG code changes, package dependency changes require a complete restart of Airflow.

## Step 3: Add an Airflow variable

After restarting your Airflow instance, you should not see the DAG import error from [Step 2](#step-2-add-a-provider-package). Next, you need to add an Airflow variable to be used in the [GithubSensor](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow-providers-github/versions/latest/modules/GithubSensor).

> [Airflow variables](airflow-variables.md) are key value pairs that can be accessed from any DAG in your Airflow environment. Because the variable `my_github_repo` is used in the DAG code with a default of `apache/airflow`, you'll need to create the variable and give it a value in the Airflow UI to wait for a commit in your own repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[**Airflow variables**](airflow-variables.md) are key value pairs that can be accessed from any DAG in your Airflow environment. Because the variable `my_github_repo` is used in the DAG code with a default of `apache/airflow`, you'll need to create the variable and give it a value in the Airflow UI to wait for a commit in your own repository.
```

1. Go to **Admin** > **Variables** to open the list of Airflow variables. Since no Airflow variables have been defined yet, it is empty.

    ![Screenshot of the Airflow UI with the Admin tab menu expanded to show the Variables option.](/img/tutorials/get-started-with-airflow-part-2_AdminVariables.png)

2. Click on the **+** sign to open the form for adding a new variable. Set the **Key** for the variable as `my_github_repo` and set the **Val** as a GitHub repository you have administrator access to. Make sure the **Val** is in the format `github_account_name/repository_name` (for example `apache/airflow`). The repository can be private.

3. Click **Save**.

## Step 4: Create a GitHub connection

> An [Airflow connection](connections.md) is a set of configurations for connecting with an external tool in the data ecosystem. If you use a hook or operator that connects to an external system, it likely needs a connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An [**Airflow connection**](connections.md) is a set of configurations for connecting with an external tool in the data ecosystem. If you use a hook or operator that connects to an external system, it likely needs a connection.
```

5. Save the connection by clicking the **Save** button.

Note that the option to test connections is only available for selected connection types and disabled by default in Airflow 2.7+, see [Test a connection](connections.md#test-a-connection).

## Step 5: Create an HTTP connection

1. In the **Connections** view, click **+** to create a new connection.
2. Name the connection `open_notify_api_conn` and select a **Connection Type** of `HTTP`.
3. Enter the host URL for the API you want to query in the **Host** field. For this tutorial we use the [Open Notify API](http://open-notify.org/Open-Notify-API/), which has an endpoint returning the current location of the ISS. The host for this API is `http://api.open-notify.org`.
4. Click **Save**.

You should now have two connections as shown in the following screenshot:
    
![Connection List](/img/tutorials/get-started-with-airflow-part-2_TwoConnections.png)

## Step 6: Review the DAG code

Now that your Airflow environment is configured correctly, look at the DAG code you copied from the repository to see how your new variable and connections are used at the code level.

> At the top of the file, the DAG is described in a docstring. It is an Airflow best practice to always describe your DAGs up front and include any additional connections or variables that are required for the DAG to work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the top of the file, the DAG is described in a docstring. It's highly recommended to always document your DAGs  and include any additional connections or variables that are required for the DAG to work.
```

"""
```

After the docstring, all necessary packages are imported. Notice how both the HttpOperator as well as the GithubSensor are part of provider packages.

```python
from airflow.decorators import dag, task
from airflow.models.baseoperator import chain
from airflow.providers.http.operators.http import HttpOperator
from airflow.providers.github.sensors.github import GithubSensor
from airflow.exceptions import AirflowException
from airflow.models import Variable
from pendulum import datetime
from typing import Any
import logging
```

Next, the Airflow task logger is instantiated and two top-level variables are defined. The variable `YOUR_GITHUB_REPO_NAME` is set to the value of the Airflow variable `my_github_repo` you defined in [Step 3](#step-3-add-an-airflow-variable) and the variable `YOUR_COMMIT_MESSAGE` is set to the commit message that triggers the DAG to run.

```python
task_logger = logging.getLogger("airflow.task")

YOUR_GITHUB_REPO_NAME = Variable.get(
    "my_github_repo", "apache/airflow"
)  # This is the variable you created in the Airflow UI
YOUR_COMMIT_MESSAGE = "Where is the ISS right now?"  # Replace with your commit message
```

> Below, a function is defined to be used in the GithubSensor. This function processes the repository object returned by the [`get_repo` method](https://pygithub.readthedocs.io/en/latest/examples/Repository.html) of the [PyGitHub](https://pygithub.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html) package, using `.get_commits()` to retrieve the last 10 commits to the repository and compare them to the commit message defined in `YOUR_COMMIT_MESSAGE`. If the message is found, the function returns `True`, otherwise `False`. Note that the function is defined at the top level of the DAG file for convenience but could also be defined in a separate module, located in the `include` directory and reused across multiple DAGs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the next section, a function is defined to be used in the GithubSensor. This function processes the repository object returned by the [`get_repo` method](https://pygithub.readthedocs.io/en/latest/examples/Repository.html) of the [PyGitHub](https://pygithub.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html) package, using `.get_commits()` to retrieve the last 10 commits to the repository and compare them to the commit message defined in `YOUR_COMMIT_MESSAGE`. If the message is found, the function returns `True`, otherwise `False`. Note that the function is defined at the top level of the DAG file for convenience but could also be defined in a separate module, located in the `include` directory and reused across multiple DAGs.
```

- `tags` adds the `Connections` tag to the DAG in the Airflow UI.

```python
@dag(
    start_date=datetime(2024, 6, 1),
    schedule="@daily",
    catchup=False,
    doc_md=__doc__,
    default_args={"owner": "airflow", "retries": 3},
    tags=["Connections"],
)
def find_the_iss():
```

The DAG itself has three tasks: 

- The first task uses the [GithubSensor](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow-providers-github/versions/latest/modules/GithubSensor) to check whether the commit message `Where is the ISS right now?` has been added to your GitHub repository with the help of the `commit_message_checker` function described previously. 

    This task utilizes the Airflow variable (`my_github_repo`) and the Airflow connection (`my_github_connection`) to access the correct repository with the appropriate credentials. The [sensor](what-is-a-sensor.md) checks for the tag every 5 seconds (`poke_interval`) and times out after one hour (`timeout`). It is best practice to always set a `timeout` because the default value is 7 days, which can impact performance if left unchanged in DAGs that run on a higher frequency.

    ```python

>         github_sensor = GithubSensor(

Reviewer: I know that these blocks are indented in the DAG, but since we're reviewing them separate from the DAG I'd be fine with keeping them level with the code fence for legibility

            task_id="github_sensor",
            github_conn_id="my_github_conn",
            method_name="get_repo",
            method_params={"full_name_or_id": YOUR_GITHUB_REPO_NAME},
            result_processor=lambda repo: commit_message_checker(repo, YOUR_COMMIT_MESSAGE),
            timeout=60 * 60,
            poke_interval=5,
        )
    ```

- The second task uses the HttpOperator to send a `GET` request to the `/iss-now.json` endpoint of the [Open Notify API](http://open-notify.org/Open-Notify-API/) to retrieve the current location of the ISS. The response is logged to the Airflow task logs and pushed to the [XCom](airflow-passing-data-between-tasks.md) table in the Airflow metadata database to be retrieved by downstream tasks.

    ```python
        get_iss_coordinates = HttpOperator(
            task_id="get_iss_coordinates",
            http_conn_id="open_notify_api_conn",
            endpoint="/iss-now.json",
            method="GET",
            log_response=True,
        )
    ```

> - The third task uses the [TaskFlow API's](airflow-decorators.md) `@task` decorator to run a regular Python function processing the coordinates returned by the `get_iss_coordinates` task and printing the city and country of the ISS location to the task logs. The coordinates are passed to the function as an argument using `get_iss_coordinates.output`, which accesses the value returned by the `get_iss_coordinates` task from the XCom table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The third task uses the [TaskFlow API's](airflow-decorators.md) `@task` decorator to run a Python function that processes the coordinates returned by the `get_iss_coordinates` task and prints the city and country of the ISS's location to the task logs. The coordinates are passed to the function as an argument using `get_iss_coordinates.output`, which accesses the data returned by the `get_iss_coordinates` task from XComs.
```
How important is it for the user to know that XComs is a table? We don't really mention it as such in https://docs.astronomer.io/learn/airflow-passing-data-between-tasks#xcom

Author: Well, I did not know that when I first used XComs 😅 so I don't think it is important at this point but it should be in the XCom guide, will take note of that :)

>     This is an example of how you can use a traditional operator (HttpOperator) and a TaskFlow API task to perform similar operations, in this case querying an API. Which way of task writing you choose depends on your use case and often comes down to personal preference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The following is an example of how you can use a traditional operator (HttpOperator) and a TaskFlow API task to perform similar operations, in this case querying an API. The best way to write tasks depends on your use case and often comes down to personal preference.
```

Reviewer: Is this code part of the DAG they copy, or is this an alternative rewrite of the DAG? If it's the latter, should we put it in a note?

Author: It is part of the DAG code they copy. What I was trying to say is "you used the HttpOperator to query an API but you can also do the same in a `@task` decorated task" ... I think I put that in a bit of a confusing way.

    ```

Lastly, the dependency between the three tasks is set so that the `get_iss_coordinates` task only runs after the `github_sensor` task is successful and the `log_iss_location` task only runs after the `get_iss_coordinates` task is successful. This is done using the `chain` method. You can learn more about setting dependencies between tasks in the [Manage task and task group dependencies in Airflow](managing-dependencies.md) guide.

The last line of the DAG file calls the `find_the_iss` function to create the DAG.

```python
    chain(github_sensor, get_iss_coordinates, log_iss_location_obj)

find_the_iss()
```

## Step 7: Test your DAG

1. Go to the DAGs view and unpause the `find_the_iss` DAG by clicking on the toggle to the left of the DAG name. The last scheduled DAG run automatically starts, and the `github_sensor` task starts waiting for the commit message `"Where is the ISS right now?"` to be pushed to your GitHub repository. You can see two light green circles in the **DAGs** view which indicates that the DAG run is in progress and the `github_sensor` task is running.

    ![DAG running](/img/tutorials/get-started-with-airflow-part-2_GraphView.png)

> 2. Create a new commit in your GitHub repository by changing any file then running:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Create a new commit in your GitHub repository by changing any file, then running:
```

    ```bash
    git add <file>
    git commit -m "Where is the ISS right now?"
    git push
    ```

> 3. Watch for the `github_sensor` task to finish successfully. The `get_iss_coordinates` task should start right after, and after it completes successfully the `log_iss_location` task runs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Watch for the `github_sensor` task to finish successfully. The `get_iss_coordinates` task should start right after, and after it completes the `log_iss_location` task runs.
```

> 4. In the **Grid** view, click on the green box representing the successful task run for `log_iss_location`. Check the **Log** tab of the task instance to learn where the ISS is right now!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. In the **Grid** view, click the green box representing the successful task run for `log_iss_location`. Check the **Log** tab of the task instance to learn where the ISS is right now!
```
